# AI Policy

PySCF permits the use of AI-assisted tools, including large language
models (LLMs) and code-generation systems, subject to the requirements below.

## Responsibility

You are responsible for any code you submit to PySCF's repositories, regardless
of whether it was manually written or generated by AI. You must understand and
be able to explain the code you submit as well as the existing related code. It
is not acceptable to submit a patch that you cannot understand and explain
yourself. Do not use AI to automatically generate comments, or issue descriptions.

## Acceptable Uses

Contributors may use AI tools to assist with:

* Explaining existing code.
* Drafting documentation.
* Generating examples or tutorials.
* Refactoring code.
* Suggesting tests.
* Identifying potential bugs or performance issues.
* Improving code readability and style.

## Disclosure

You must disclose whether AI has been used to assist in the development of
your pull request.
If so, you must document which tool(s) have been used, how they were used,
and specify what code or text is AI generated. We will reject any pull request
that does not include the disclosure.

## Copyright

Contributors must ensure that submitted content complies with the project's
license requirements.

All code in PySCF is released under the Apache 2 copyright license.

## Communication

When interacting with developers (forums, discussions, issues, pull requests,
etc.) do not use AI to speak for you, except for translation or grammar editing.
If the developers want to chat with a chatbot, they can do so themselves.
Human-to-human communication is essential for an open source community to thrive.

## AI Agents
The use of an AI agent that writes code and then submits a pull request autonomously is
not permitted. A human must check any generated code and submit a pull request according
to the 'Responsibility' section above.

## Acknowledgements

This policy is adapted from the NumPy AI Policy:

https://github.com/numpy/numpy/blob/main/doc/source/dev/ai_policy.rst
